So, something weird is happening on
YouTube right now, and most creators
haven't even noticed yet, which gives
you a distinct advantage. Fitness
channels are using the visual language
of finance creators, and a channel about
Minecraft just blew up by using the same
format of a video about an NFL player.
It is the new strategy quietly
dominating YouTube right now. And it's
called
niche bending.
The term was coined by creator Tim
Danilov, [music]
and it's how he took a faceless YouTube
channel from zero to $56,000 a month in
just 30 days. And then he did it again,
taking another channel from zero to 150
million views. And then again, zero to
$23,000
in less than 90 days. So, if you're
still trying to find a niche in 2026,
quite frankly, you're doing it all
wrong. You need to start bending one
into a position so it does all of the
work for you. To understand how Tim did
this time and time again, you almost
have to unlearn what you think a niche
is. Most people think a niche is just a
topic [music] like, I have a gardening
channel. But Tim doesn't operate with
that type of thinking.
>> I think it's the easiest way to [music]
come up with a niche, because like,
essentially your niche is the
combination of the format [music]
and the market.
>> You see,
your niche isn't just a topic you talk
about. To be more specific, it's the
combination of the market you're serving
and the format you're using. First, you
have the market, and these are massive
categories from finance to fitness,
gaming to DIY, and so on. And these
rarely ever change. You can't really
invent a new market, but then you have
the format. This is the container for
your content. How do you deliver the
information? Is it a tier list, a
100-day challenge, a video essay?
>> There are thousands of new formats every
single day on YouTube. Like, that's the
the most creative part. And what the
niche bending is is you create a new
niche by applying the viral format to
the market where it was never used
before. And this is already happening
everywhere on YouTube. Let me show you.
Here's a video from NFL Stories, a small
but very successful channel about
gridiron. I can't say football, it isn't
football. But anyway, that's the market.
His video, "This video will change the
way you see Patrick Mahomes forever" is
the format. And it's a video that's
performed well for the channel to the
tune of 75,000 views, about three and a
half times more views than typical for
the channel. Now, look at this Minecraft
channel made by Rafa. Four days later,
they posted "This video will change how
you play Minecraft forever." It's the
same exact title structure and the same
promise, but it's for an entirely
different audience. In other words,
different markets, same format. And
then, My Matrix did the same thing in
the spirituality niche. And it's a 100
times outlier for his channel. That is
what you call a viral moment. And this
is one format in three completely
different markets all finding outlier
success. That's is the power of niche
bending. Now then, for a quick hack to
niche bend any video on YouTube, you can
use this cool little vidIQ remix tool.
What it will do is remix a title of the
current video to fit your niche. In this
example, the channel we're niche bending
into is about weight loss and fitness
workouts. And so, the remix titles from
the NFL video reflect that.
This handy tool is at your fingertips
wherever you are on YouTube because
it'll also appear on home pages and
channel pages as well. There's a link in
the description. If you want to witness
an absolute masterclass of this
strategy, let me introduce you to
TierZoo. At first glance, this looks
like a gaming channel. The thumbnails
have STR rankings, health bars, and
knockout screens. But in reality, it's
an animal biology channel. So, let's run
it through our equation. The market:
zoology, education, nature
documentaries. Usually this market is
traditional, very considered, arguably
quite slow and boring by today's
standards. Think David Attenborough.
It's a calm narration.
A giant black void, larger than all the
rest of the world's habitats combined.
But to formats,
it's competitive gaming. It's patch
notes,
tier lists. And it's not just the
packaging this time. Tier Zoo took the
very serious concept of evolution and
bent it into gaming language. As a
result of this format, the creator
doesn't describe things in a
matter-of-fact way, such as humans
adapting to the environmental
conditions. Instead, he says,
>> This was the first step towards refining
the cooperative loot sharing play style
that have made humans so dominant in the
current meta. Now, you might be
surprised to learn that the devs have
nerfed humans in the past.
The tree-dwelling strategy was seen as a
cheap way to avoid dealing with other
players, and so the devs decided to
reduce the number and size of trees in
the Africa server.
>> And when comparing one environment to
another, such as the Amazon rainforest
and the African plains,
>> I know I drone on a lot about how OP
African builds are, but the Amazon
rainforest is home to some of the most
fearsome predators in the game. And as
for extinction-level events, well, it's
just a patch update to him. So, why is
it that of all the sloth builds, only
the tree sloths survived the
Anthropocene update? Well, it turns out
that it's for the same reason that their
low tier. Most ice age top tiers were
wiped out by the invasion of humans, and
giant ground [music] sloths were no
exception.
Despite being able to easily one-shot
humans with their claws swipes, giant
sloths had no defense against
projectiles. So, why does this work so
well? Well, it's because it unlocks a
new audience. If you make a normal
nature documentary, you're competing
against the likes of National
Geographic, and I'd say that's a pretty
tough fight. And a certain audience will
watch that content because we all know
what to expect from it. But, by bending
the format, Tier Zoo is speaking to an
entirely new audience who might never
watch a traditional nature documentary.
And by speaking the audience's language
and entertaining them the way they
expect to be entertained,
he's tricked them into learning
something. In essence, what Tier Zoo has
done is take a saturated market, that
being nature documentaries, and made it
feel brand new by bending into a format
container from an entirely different
market, that being video games. So, how
do you make this work for you? How do
you actually find these niche bending
combinations without guessing? Well,
that brings us to the mapping method,
and it works like a grid. First, you
pick a format that's been working for
years. Let's take the example of every
blank explained in X minutes as a
format.
Now, map this across all of the major
markets. For gaming,
it's taken. As for lifestyle, already
taken. And in true crime, yep, gobbled
up there as well. But then, you look at
gardening or sales or interior design,
and you see an empty square. And when
you do see an empty square on that map,
this isn't due to a lack of interest,
it's an opportunity. It is blue ocean.
The format is proven and the market
exists, but nobody has yet combined them
together. And this is where you can
plant your flag. For example, take this
outlier video from Fin's Play. They made
a silly meme video, POV, you're an NPC
in Vice City. But that silly video got
them 2.7 million views on a channel with
just 3 and 1/2 thousand subscribers.
Now, watch what happens when other
creators from different markets see that
format and realize it's an empty square
on their map. This channel took the same
POV, you're an NPC format, and bent it
into Minecraft. Their video, The Life of
a Minecraft Wolf, got 1.7 million views.
Following on from that, this channel
bent it towards a superhero video game
content, playing Spider-Man from an
NPC's perspective, and they turned it
into a long-form video. It's now got
over a quarter of a million views, the
highest-performing video on their
channel so far. This is the same format,
just brought to different markets with
massive results. And every single one of
those was an empty square on the map
until someone filled it. Now, I
appreciate that these specific examples
might not bend into your particular
niche, or maybe everyone watching this
video right now is scrambling to
capitalize on the formats we've already
shown you. So, let me demonstrate how
you can find these videos yourself,
because finding novel formats that will
blow up your channel is a lot easier
than what it sounds. [music] So, you
already know about the remix tool from
our browser extension that I showed you
earlier, but this time I want you to go
to vidiq.com and start a brand-new
conversation with our AI coach. I want
you to think of this coach as your
YouTube researcher. vidIQ's data scrapes
YouTube and is refreshed every single
day. And to be quite honest, other AI
chatbots simply don't have the
capabilities that ours does. So, next,
type this sentence into the chat box,
"Find me recent viral videos about your
niche from small channels that are
getting unusually high views." In this
instance, we're going to go with a Las
Vegas casinos because
we can't cheat the casinos, but we can
cheat YouTube. Oh, and by the way, you
can also ask our AI coach to look at
this for just long-form videos or
shorts. Now, typically, it does take a
minute or so for the AI coach to get
back to you, and that's because it's
being very diligent trawling through
thousands, if not millions, of videos to
find what you're looking for. And a
minute is a lot quicker than scrolling
through endless YouTube videos for days
and weeks, isn't it? Now, in this
example, it surfaced five Vegas casinos
that will close next. Which casino dies
first? It is an insane outlier for this
channel with nearly a million long-form
views on a 20-minute video. Now, that
title represents a format that we can
bend. We could apply this to retail
stores, fast-food chains,
cryptocurrency, game studios, sports
franchises that are relocating, which
let me tell you would never happen in
real football,
except for that one occasion. We can
bend all of these in any way that fits
our needs for our channel. However, um
this might be the most important part of
the entire video.
You do need to be careful.
There is one rule in these bending that
matters more than anything else. Do not
bend a format you cannot deliver the
expertise in. So, if you are a dentist,
use the gaming tier list to rank
toothpaste. That works because you're an
expert dentist, but don't try to use a
finance format if you don't understand
money. Anyone can copy a format, but
very few can fill the formats with
high-value knowledge. The creators
winning in 2026 aren't the ones finding
magical new niches. They are the ones
looking for what already works and
asking themselves, "How does this look
in my world?" And if you enjoyed the
taste of the VidIQ tools I showed you in
this video, why not come and have a look
at the whole buffet? Dozens more tools
to help you grow your channel are just a
click away.
I'll see you there.